More than
seventy per cent of the Indian population lives in the rural areas. A revolutionary
decision of nationalising the banks took place on 19th July, 1969 because
agriculture was not at all considered as one of the areas where the banks are
supposed to give credit to the farmers. That was the rationale behind taking a
drastic decision to nationalise the banks. The State Bank of India is now feeling as
a big brother. The State Bank of Mysore, which was in existence in Karnataka,
had a lot of branches in the rural areas. A lot of agricultural and subsidiary crop
loans were given to the farmers by the State Bank of Mysore. But by merging that
bank with the State Bank of India, the people of this country, particularly the rural
people, are feeling that there is some infringement of their rights in terms of getting loans from the nationalised banks. Only the corporate sector and the bigwigs are
capable of entering this bank. The common man will now feel that the State Bank
of India is not his bank. There are Rs. 1.8 lakh crore of NPAs in the State Bank of
India. Everyone feels that NPAs are only in SBI, but it is there in all commercial
banks and it is a big sum of money which has gone waste and it is at the cost of the
poor people that this amount is growing. The State Bank of India is imposing
some stringent conditions on customers. Nearly 31 crore people of this country are
going to be affected by this stringent action by the State Bank of India with regard
to keeping a minimum balance in the saving accounts. This is a very bad decision.
Furthermore, the bank proposes to impose charges for cash withdrawal and also
service charges. All these decisions are anti-poor. I would like to draw the
attention of the Government to the fact that people in this country, particularly the
farmers are in a very critical condition. On the one hand, there is excessive rain in
Northern India and on the other there is no rain in Southern India. The State of
Karnataka is reeling under drought for the last five to six years. The suicide by
farmers has assumed alarming proportions in this country. The Government of
Karnataka took a revolutionary decision of waiving the loan of the farmers to the
tune of Rs. 8261 crore. I would therefore urge upon the Government of India to
waive the farmers loans in the commercial banks so as to enable the farmers to
breathe peacefully at least for sometime.